Oracle Data Analytics Accelerator (DAX)
---------------------------------------

DAX is a coprocessor which resides on the SPARC M7 processor chip, and has
direct access to the CPU's L3 caches as well as physical memory. It performs a
handful of operations on data streams with various input and output formats.
The driver is merely a transport mechanism and does not have knowledge of the
various opcodes and data formats. A user space library provides high level
services and translates these into low level commands which are then passed
into the driver and subsequently the hypervisor and the coprocessor. This
document describes the general flow of the driver, its structures, and its
programmatic interface. It should be emphasized though that this interface is
not intended for general use.  All applications using DAX should go through the
user libraries.

The DAX is documented in 3 places, though all are internal-only:
 * Hypervisor API Wiki
 * Virtual Machine Spec
 * M7 PRM

High Level Overview
-------------------

A coprocessor request is described by a Command Control Block (CCB). The CCB
contains an opcode and various parameters. The opcode specifies what operation
is to be done, and the parameters specify options, flags, sizes, and addresses.
The CCB (or an array of CCBs) is passed to the Hypervisor, which handles
queueing and scheduling of requests to the available coprocessor execution
units. A status code returned indicates if the request was submitted
successfully or if there was an error.  One of the addresses given in each CCB
is a pointer to a "completion area", which is a 128 byte memory block that is
written by the coprocessor to provide execution status. No interrupt is
generated upon completion; the completion area must be polled by software to
find out when a transaction has finished, but the M7 processor provides a
mechanism to pause the virtual processor until the completion status has been
updated by the coprocessor. A key feature of the DAX coprocessor design is that
after a request is submitted, the kernel is no longer involved in the
processing of it.  The polling is done at the user level, which results in
almost zero latency between completion of a request and resumption of execution
of the requesting thread.


Addressing Memory
-----------------

The kernel does not have access to physical memory in the Sun4v architecture,
as there is an additional level of memory virtualization present. This
intermediate level is called "real" memory, and the kernel treats this as
if it were physical.  The Hypervisor handles the translations between real
memory and physical so that each logical domain (LDOM) can have a partition
of physical memory that is isolated from that of other LDOMs.  When the
kernel sets up a virtual mapping, it is a translation from a virtual
address to a real address.

The DAX coprocessor can only operate on _physical memory_, so before a request
can be fed to the coprocessor, all the addresses in a CCB must be converted
into physical addresses. The kernel cannot do this since it has no visibility
into physical addresses. So a CCB may contain either the virtual or real
addresses of the buffers or a combination of them. An "address type" field is
available for each address that may be given in the CCB. In all cases, the
Hypervisor will translate all the addresses to physical before dispatching to
hardware.


The Driver API
--------------

The driver provides most of its services via the ioctl() call. There is also
some functionality provided via the mmap() call. These are the available ioctl
functions:

CCB_THR_INIT

Creates a new context for a thread and initializes it for use. Each thread
that wishes to submit requests must open the DAX device file and perform this
ioctl.  This function causes a context structure to be allocated for the
thread, which contains pointers and values used internally by the driver to
keep track of submitted requests. A completion area buffer is also allocated,
and this is large enough to contain the completion areas for many concurrent
requests. The size of this buffer is returned to the caller since this is
needed for the mmap() call so that the user can get access to the completion
area buffer. Another value returned is the maximum length of the CCB array
that may be submitted.

CCB_THR_FINI

Destroys a context for a thread. After doing this, the thread can no longer
submit any requests.

CA_DEQUEUE

Notifies the driver that one or more completion areas are no longer needed and
may be reused. This function must be performed whenever a thread has completed
transactions that it has consumed. It need not be done after every transaction,
but just often enough so that the completion areas do not run out.

CCB_EXEC

Submits one or more CCBs for execution on the coprocessor. An array of CCBs is
given, along with the array length in bytes. The number of bytes actually
accepted by the coprocessor is returned along with the offset of the completion
area chosen for this set of submissions. This offset is relative to the start
of the completion area virtual address given by a call to mmap() to the driver.

There also several ioctl functions related to performance counters, but these
are not described in this document. Access to the performance counters is
provided via a utility program included with the DAX user libraries.

CCB_KILL

Kills a CCB during execution. The CCB is guaranteed to not continue executing
once this call returns successfully.

CCB_INFO

Retrieves info about an executing CCB. Note that some Hypervisors might return
notfound when the CCB is in inprogress state. To ensure a CCB in the notfound
state will never be executed, CCB_KILL must be called on that CCB.

MMAP

The mmap() function provides two different services depending on
whether or not PROT_WRITE is given.

 - If a read-only mapping is requested, then the call is a request to
   map the completion area buffer. In this case, the size requested
   must equal the completion area size returned by the CCB_THR_INIT
   ioctl call.
 - If a read/write mapping is requested, then memory is allocated.
   The memory is physically contiguous and locked. This memory can
   be used for any virtual buffer in a CCB.


Completion of a Request
-----------------------

The first byte in each completion area is the command status, and this byte is
updated by the coprocessor hardware. Software may take advantage of special M7
processor capabilities to efficiently poll this status byte.  First, a series
of new address space identifiers has been introduced which can be used with a
Load From Alternate Space instruction in order to effect a "monitored load".
The typical ASI used would be 0x84, ASI_MONITOR_PRIMARY. Second, a new
instruction, Monitored Wait (mwait) is introduced. It is just like /PAUSE/ in
that it suspends execution of the virtual processor, but only until one of
several events occur. If the block of data containing the monitored location is
written to by any other virtual processor, then the mwait terminates. This
allows software to resume execution immediately after a transaction completes,
and without a context switch or kernel to user transition. The latency
between transaction completion and resumption of execution may thus be
just a few nanoseconds.


Life cycle of a DAX Submission
------------------------------

 - Application opens dax device
 - calls the CCB_THR_INIT ioctl
 - invokes mmap() to get the completion area address
 - optionally use mmap to allocate memory buffers for the request
 - allocate a CCB and fill in the opcode, flags, parameter, addresses, etc.
 - call the CCB_EXEC ioctl
 - go into a loop executing monitored load + monitored wait and
   terminate when the command status indicates the request is complete
 - call the CA_DEQUEUE ioctl to release the completion area
 - call munmap to deallocate completion area and any other memory
 - call the CCB_THR_FINI ioctl
 - close the dax device


Memory Constraints
------------------

The DAX hardware operates only on physical addresses. Therefore, it is not
aware of virtual memory mappings and the discontiguities that may exist in the
physical memory that a virtual buffer maps to. There is no I/O TLB nor any kind
of scatter/gather mechanism. Any data passed to DAX must reside in a physically
contiguous region of memory.

As stated earlier, the Hypervisor translates all addresses within a CCB to
physical before handing off the CCB to DAX. The Hypervisor determines the
virtual page size for each virtual address given, and uses this to program a
size limit for each addresses. This prevents the coprocessor from reading or
writing beyond the bound of the virtual page, even though it is accessing
physical memory directly. A simpler way of saying this is that DAX will not
"cross" a virtual page boundary. If an 8k virtual page is used, then the data
is strictly limited to 8k. If a user's buffer is larger than 8k, then a larger
page size must be used, or the transaction size will still be limited to 8k.
There are two ways of accomplishing this.

Huge pages. A user may allocate huge pages using either the mmap or shmget
interfaces. Memory buffers residing on huge pages may be used to achieve much
larger DAX transaction sizes, but the rules must still be followed, and no
transaction can cross a page boundary, even a huge page.  A major caveat is
that Linux on Sparc presents 8Mb as one of the huge page sizes. Sparc does not
actually provide a 8Mb hardware page size, and this size is synthesized by
pasting together two 4Mb pages. The reasons for this are historical, and it
creates an issue because only half of this 8Mb page can actually be used for
any given buffer in a DAX request, and it must be either the first half or the
second half; it cannot be a 4Mb chunk in the middle, since that crosses a page
boundary.

DAX memory. The driver provides a memory allocation mechanism which guarantees
that the backing physical memory is contiguous. A call to mmap requests an
allocation, and the virtual address returned to the user is backed by mappings
to 8k pages. However, when any address within one of these allocations is used
in a DAX request, the driver replaces the user virtual address with the real
address of the backing memory, and utilizes the DAX _flow control_ mechanism
(if available) to specify a size limit on the memory buffer. This kind of
allocation is called a "synthetic large page" because the driver can "create"
pages of arbitrary size that do not depend on the hardware page sizes.

Note. The synthetic large pages are only supported on some versions of the M7
cpu, and an alternate technique is employed on the other versions: a mmap call
may only request exactly 4Mb, and again, a contiguous physical allocation is
used, and 8k pages are used for the user mappings to this area, while inside
the kernel, a 4Mb virtual page is actually used. Similar to the synthetic large
page "translation", when a user gives one of these addresses in a ccb, the
driver replaces it with the corresponding kernel virtual address. Then the
Hypervisor will sense the 4Mb virtual page size to complete the logic.


Organization of the Driver Source
---------------------------------

The driver is split into several files based on the general area of
functionality provided:

 * dax_main.c - attach/detach, open/close, ioctl, thread init/fini functions,
   context allocation, ccb submit/dequeue
 * dax_mm.c   - memory allocation, mapping, and locking/unlocking
 * dax_debugfs.c - support for debugfs access
 * dax_bip.c  - utility functions to handle BIP buffers, used to track outstanding CCBs
 * dax_perf.c - performance counter functions
 * ccb.h - internal structure of a CCB and completion area
 * sys_dax.h  - ioctl definitions and structures
 * dax_impl.h - driver internal macros and structures


Data Structures used by the Driver
----------------------------------

 * BIP Buffer - A variant of a circular buffer that returns variable length
   contiguous blocks
 * Context - a per thread structure that holds the state of CCBs submitted by
   the thread
 * dax_mm -  a structure that describes one memory management context, i.e., a
   list of dax contexts belonging to the threads in a process
 * dax_vma - a structure that describes one memory allocation


Note on Memory Unmap Operations
-------------------------------

The multi threaded architecture of applications means that multiple threads
have access to, and control over memory that is being used for DAX operations.
It is the responsibility of the user to ensure that proper synchronization
occurs among multiple threads accessing memory that may be accessed by DAX. But
the driver has to protect against a thread releasing memory that may be in use
by DAX, as freed memory might be immediately reallocated somewhere else, to
another process, or to another kernel entity, and DAX might still be reading or
writing to this memory. This is a hard problem to solve because there is no
easy way to find out if a particular memory region is currently in use by DAX.
This can only be done by a search of all outstanding transactions for memory
addresses that fall within range of memory allocation being freed. Hence, a
memory unmap operation will wait for all DAX operations using that memory to
complete.

